# CS301 Final Project Progress Report
#### Group Members: Nick Tocci, Christian Lussier, Ben Watto, Dillon Thoma
#### 11/9/18

## Progress Report
<!-- Intro -->
Our project looks to analyze trends regarding foodborne illnesses which remain very prevalent in today's society. With this, our project is trying to answer the question, is there a correlation between the production of food and illnesses? Additionally, our project will try to look into data regarding the number of foodborne illnesses today versus these same illnesses in the past in an attempt to see if there are differences between the two and if these illnesses are handled better today. In order to answer these questions, our group has taken a variety of steps in the last two weeks to make great progress on our project. We first researched background information about our topic to learn more about it and then found data that will be useful in our research. We have begun to heavily analyze this data using R programming concepts in order to view the data in different ways. Utilizing these different views of our data that coding in RStudio can provide us, we have begun to analyze our data in order to answer our research questions. We have made significant progress on our final project by completing background research on the topic, choosing and examining our main dataset, and implementing code that will allow us to better understand this dataset.

<!-- Paragraph about how we have conducted necessary research on the background -->
We have completed quite a bit of research on our project's background at this point in the research process. Foodborne illnesses are, quite simply, illnesses that are caused by food products in some capacity. According to Fein, Sara B., C-T Jordan Lin, and Alan S. Levy, "consumers play an essential role in foodborne illness prevention." This is because they handle food they prepare themselves and decide if they should eat food that could cause foodborne illnesses, like raw meat (Fein, Sara B., C-T Jordan Lin, and Alan S. Levy). Though this can help prevent foodborne illnesses it can also cause them. Most people are not professional chefs and as a result, they may prepare food in a way that is more likely to cause foodborne illnesses. Additionally, consumers obviously choose whether or not to eat something, so they are essentially choosing if they want to increase their risk of catching a foodborne disease. This may be why foodborne illnesses are very common in today's society. Foodborne illnesses are very widespread, causing around 48 million cases of foodborne illnesses in the United States each year, which is equivalent to sickening 1 in 6 Americans (FDA). Moreover, there are an estimated 128,000 hospitalizations and 3,000 deaths annually from foodborne illnesses in the United States, despite it having one of the safest foods supplies in the world (FDA). Also, 800 foodborne disease outbreaks are reported in the United States each year (Dewey-Mattia, Daniel, et al.).

<!-- Additional paragraph about how we have conducted necessary research on the background -->
Additional background research shows that foodborne illness outbreaks are the result of failures in the food system either to control known hazards or to anticipate novel hazards. A tool known as the RCA, which stands for the root cause analysis, is a systematic, analytical approach to identify the underlying reasons why an outbreak occurred. The ultimate goal of RCA is to uncover the systemic weaknesses in the food system that permitted its breakdown so the system can be redesigned in a way that prevents recurrence (Firestone, Hoelzer, Hedberg, Conroy, Guzewich). These types of studies are used to determine the cause of the outbreaks and create some awareness among consumers to help prevent the same type of outbreaks from happening in the future. With the number of foodborne illnesses that occur annually in the United States and globally, it is obvious there is still more work to be done in order to prevent these outbreaks from occurring or at least cause them to do less damage. An additional goal of our research is to see if our data provides any conclusions as to why foodborne illnesses are still so prominent in the United States, and potentially find a way to anticipate and prevent these outbreaks from occurring. After completing background research on our topic of foodborne illnesses, we learned a lot regarding how widespread these diseases are and how they spread.

<!-- P for How we found the data, converted it, approach we have decided upon to analyze it -->
We found the data that will be used in our analysis from a variety of sources. We found what is currently our main dataset, Surveillance for Foodborne Disease Outbreaks United States, 2016: Annual Report, by doing research in online search engines for information about foodborne diseases and their widespread impact. However, this data came in PDF format which meant we had to convert it to a CSV format in order to use it in RStudio, something we did by using zamzar.com, an online file converter. We also had to clean up the data after the fact due to unnecessary changes that occurred during the conversion. Additionally, after reviewing the feedback from our proposal, we decided to follow up on the idea of researching data on recent E-coli outbreaks, and compare them to the data we found from past outbreaks to see whether there was an increase or decrease in outbreaks over time, as well as how well they are handled based on hospitalizations and deaths. In order to find data to look into this, we searched the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website (cdc.gov) where we found some valuable data and information which will prove valuable as we look into E-coli disease trends in greater detail. We believe this will make our project stronger and possibly more valuable as we will look at a more general view of foodborne diseases and also the more specific diseases caused by E-coli. We have also come up with an overall approach in terms of how we will analyze our data. Once we feel we have found a reputable dataset, we will download it and then convert it to a CSV file type and clean it up if needed. We will then import the data into RStudio which we will use to view our data for analysis. In RStudio, we will plot the data in a variety of ways and manipulate it if necessary in order to see trends in the data. This will help us analyze our data. Data will be key to our overall project as we find reputable datasets and use RStudio to properly analyze them.

<!-- P for What we have found from the data so far. -->
We have completed a decent amount of analysis on our data so far. As of right now, we have mainly only looked into the Surveillance for Foodborne Disease Outbreaks United States, 2016: Annual Report dataset because of time constraints and because we did not have the idea to look into E-coli trends until just recently when we received the grade and comments for our project proposal. Despite this, our main dataset has provided a plethora of interesting insights into foodborne illnesses. We saw that most foodborne illnesses caused around the same relatively low number of outbreaks in the United States, except for Norovirus and Salmonella, both of which caused between 130-145 outbreaks in 2016, just in the United States alone. Similarly, the number of illnesses caused by Norovirus and Salmonella etiologies in 2016 were also much higher than every other etiology measured by the dataset. However, the area of hospitalizations, Salmonella led the pack with 456 hospitalizations that were confirmed to be caused by Salmonella, while every other etiology saw hospitalization numbers under 100. Additionally, our data showed us that almost all foodborne outbreaks were caused by a single etiology and that there were 403 foodborne outbreaks, over 9210 foodborne illnesses, and 814 hospitalizations caused by these etiologies in the United States in 2016. We also learned that food products from the category of land animals, like meat and dairy products, caused both the most foodborne illness outbreaks and foodborne illnesses overall. Information like this will likely prove helpful as we look to see if there is a correlation between food production and foodborne illnesses.

<!-- P for How we have made significant progress towards implementation. -->
We have learned this information from our data from implementing R code that plots our data in different ways, giving us different insights which have been extremely helpful in completing our data analysis up to this point. Our R code first imports the data that will be analyzed and stores them in objects. These objects are then plotted in different ways, whether it be a differing type of plot or with different variables. For example, thus far we have plotted our tables using bar graphs, histograms, basic point plots, and more. Additionally, we have begun to experiment with mutating and editing our data in RStudio to find more important information. Overall, we have followed our approach for analyzing and finding our data as specified above. Using RStudio to make significant progress in implementing code has been a key part of our analysis so far.

<!-- P for New things we have learned and unexpected challenges we have faced. -->
As a group, we have learned a variety of new things and we have also faced a variety of unexpected challenges while working on this project. One of these challenges came when we attempted to convert a PDF version of a dataset (2016 Foodborne Outbreaks) to a CSV format so it could be used in R. As mentioned previously, we used an online converter (zamzar.com) in order to convert this PDF to a CSV file. The conversion was successful but all of the regular  text still appeared in the document, some column names got combined or spread across lines, and -'s were converted to special characters. This meant that converting our PDF data to a CSV format proved to be challenging because we had to manually edit the CSV document in order to have all of the data be properly organized and correct. This took the group a few hours to complete due to the somewhat large nature of the dataset and because of a large number of issues in it that stemmed from it's conversion to a CSV file. Another issue came when we attempted to import this converted dataset into R as we had housed all of the Surveillance for Foodborne Disease Outbreaks United States, 2016: Annual Report data in one CSV file. This proved to be somewhat disastrous as none of the column headings were correct and all of the data imported as a jumbled mess. As a result, we decided to put each individual table from the Surveillance for Foodborne Disease Outbreaks United States, 2016: Annual Report dataset into individual files, which allowed us to successfully use these tables in RStudio. While this wasn't exactly challenging in terms of mentally challenging, it was quite time-consuming and was an unforeseen issue that challenged our projected timeline. This challenge provided a good learning experience for our group as we learned that most websites that convert data from PDFs to CSV files are not perfect and that it can be time-consuming in order to get the converted CSV files ready for analysis in RStudio. This learning experience will likely prove valuable as we choose datasets, some of them which could be in the PDF format, to use in our research. Additionally, we have learned a number of surprising things about foodborne illnesses in general. We were surprised by the great number of foodborne illness cases that occur each year across the globe. We were even more surprised how often these foodborne illnesses can lead to death. As mentioned earlier, our data also surprised as it showed us there are tons of foodborne illness outbreaks every year just in the United States. Overall, while we have faced minor setbacks while completing this project up to this point, we have learned a lot about our topic and it's supplemental data.

<!-- Conclusion -->
We have made relatively good progress on our project since coming up with an idea for it. We have completed a good amount of background research about foodborne illnesses. We have also found datasets about these foodborne illnesses. However, some of these datasets were originally PDFs and it was quite time-consuming and challenging to convert these to CSV files and to get them to properly work in RStudio. This challenge will likely serve as a good learning experience as in the future it is possible that we will encounter more important datasets that we need to convert from PDF to CSV format. With this, we have begun to look into on our main dataset in greater detail using RStudio to manipulate and view our data in different ways, which has proved valuable for our analysis. Despite some challenges and minor setbacks, we have completed good background research, data analysis on our main datasets, and we have learned a lot, resulting in good progress on our final project.

## References
Dewey-Mattia, Daniel, et al. "Surveillance for Foodborne Disease Outbreaks—United States, 2009–2015." MMWR Surveillance Summaries 67.10 (2018): 1.

FDA. "Foodborne Illnesses: What You Need to Know." (2018): 1.

Fein, Sara B., C-T. Jordan Lin, and Alan S. Levy. "Foodborne illness: Perceptions, experience, and preventive behaviors in the United States." Journal of Food Protection 58.12 (1995): 1405-1411.

Firestone, Hoelzer, Hedberg, Conroy, Guzewich. "Leveraging Current Opportunities to Communicate Lessons Learned from Root Cause Analysis to Prevent Foodborne Illness Outbreaks." 38.2 (2018): 134-138

Scallan, Elaine, et al. "Foodborne illness acquired in the United States—major pathogens." Emerging infectious diseases 17.1 (2011): 7.

### Datasets
#### Main Dataset
Surveillance for Foodborne Disease Outbreaks United States, 2016: Annual Report (Current Main dataset): https://www.cdc.gov/fdoss/pdf/2016_FoodBorneOutbreaks_508.pdf

#### Additional Data :
- https://www.cdc.gov/ecoli/2018/o157h7-04-18/index.html
- https://www.cdc.gov/ecoli/outbreaks.html
