# CS301 Final Project Proposal
### Group Members: Nick Tocci, Christian Lussier, Ben Watto, Dillon Thoma
### 10/29/18
## Proposal
Foodborne illnesses are very prevalent in today's society because of their wide reach. Food is a necessity to survive and any foodborne illnesses that affect a major food source can have catastrophic effects. A paper by Scallan, Elaine, et al., says that by using a variety of methods and sources, an estimated 31 major pathogens cause 9.4 million cases of foodborne illnesses yearly in the United States. These illnesses can have effects ranging from mild sickness to death. Additionally, in a world of ever-changing politics, according to Scallan, "estimates of foodborne illnesses can be used to direct food safety policy and interventions." As a result, our group will look into the ideas that should be included in a policy regarding foodborne illness. Foodborne illnesses have importance because of their widespread effects, ranging from sickness to death, to government policy issues. This means that there is a lot of online data on the subject and by using RStudio we will try to answer several research questions regarding the ever-important foodborne illness.

Foodborne illnesses are important for a variety of different reasons. As mentioned earlier, foodborne illnesses are very widespread, causing around 9.4 million cases of foodborne illnesses in the United States each year (Scallan, Elaine, et al.). Similarly, 800 foodborne disease outbreaks are reported in the United States each year (Dewey-Mattia, Daniel, et al.). Additionally, foodborne illnesses can cause severe illness that can cause hospitalization. According to Scallan, Elaine, et al., foodborne illnesses cause around 55,961 hospitalizations each year. While simple-seeming illnesses that can cause hospitalization are bad enough on their own, in some cases foodborne illnesses can even cause death. In fact, foodborne illnesses cause around 1,351 deaths each year (Scallan, Elaine, et al.). Additionally, foodborne illnesses can come from a variety of different pathogens as there are 31 major pathogens causing these illnesses in the United States (Scallan, Elaine, et al.). With this, norovirus caused the most foodborne illnesses, causing 58% of illnesses out of the 31 major pathogens (Scallan, Elaine, et al.). About 20% of norovirus outbreaks are food related and norovirus on its own causes about 19 million illnesses, at least 56,000 hospitalizations, and 570-800 deaths every year in the United States (Marsh, Zachary, et al.). It is important to know that the widespread norovirus can sometimes be caused by foodborne pathogens because this could spur researchers to find ways to stop foodborne norovirus illnesses and what food causes this illness. Since norovirus also caused the most foodborne illnesses, this could stop a lot of foodborne illnesses overall. Foodborne illnesses are also important because it is concerning that even as the food industry has become larger and more modernized with more safety measure put in place, there are still a lot of foodborne illnesses. According to Marder, Ellyn P., et al., "foodborne illness continues to be a substantial health burden." Additionally, more pathogens have caused outbreaks in foodborne illnesses, such as E. Coli in recent years. This is important because more research made in the area of foodborne illness could help us understand these illnesses origins and help find ways to stop them from starting and spreading. Overall, foodborne illnesses are important because of how widespread they are, how much damage they can cause, and how prevalent they still are in modern times.

There are many questions that we could ask and try to answer when it comes to the area of foodborne illnesses. As of right now, the main question that we will try to answer is: Is there a correlation between the production of food and illnesses? We believe this question is important because if there is a correlation between the two when there is an increase, this shows that the food industry needs to be more heavily regulated. This question may adapt or change as we complete our research. There are several other questions, that are subquestions of a sort to the main questions, that our group will likely try to answer. One of these questions that we have is: Which food groups cause the most foodborne illnesses? This question is important because if specific food groups are causing foodborne illnesses maybe people will start eating them less or maybe they will be more heavily regulated. For example, in the dairy industry foodborne pathogens were found in milk and other dairy products because of contaminated farm equipment, infected cows, and more (Hati, Subrota, Kunal Gawai, and V. Sreeeja). If people knew that foodborne illnesses could be caused by dairy products, maybe they wouldn't consume as many. We also thought it would be interesting to try and answer the question: In which countries are foodborne pathogens and illnesses most prevalent? Additionally, which foodborne illnesses are the most prevalent? This question is similar to the others, but it is still important because by answering it we could possibly see what causes these illnesses and determine steps to prevent outbreaks of them. We could also ask the question: Which age group is most affected by foodborne illnesses? As we begin to analyze data and complete more research regarding foodborne illnesses and pathogens it is very likely that some of these questions will adapt and that new ones will be created. Thoroughly answering these questions could help us learn more valuable information about the area of foodborne illnesses.

Right now, there are several policies that cover foodborne illnesses, pathogens, and the like. However, many of these policies are quite small in their scope and are more reactive than proactive. As a result, our group feels it may be a good idea to consider creating a new, broader and more encompassing, policy for foodborne illnesses. This policy would be more proactive in that it would attempt to stop foodborne illnesses from happening altogether by heavily regulating the food industry. This policy could check one item from every batch (or harvest) of a food item. The policy could also call for random checks on food industry manufacturer's plants. These measures would help to stop foodborne illnesses from even leaving the factory. Additionally, if a product hits the shelves and is causing a foodborne illness, every individual item should be recalled (not just the items from one batch, which is what is currently done most of the time) and the product's manufacturer should be heavily investigated. This would help limit the spreading of foodborne diseases and hopefully stop them from happening again in the future. Such a policy would do more to regulate the important food industry in an attempt to prevent the spread of foodborne illnesses.

There is a good amount of data available on foodborne illnesses because as mentioned earlier, they are very widespread. One dataset we plan to analyze closely can be found [here.](https://www.cdc.gov/fdoss/pdf/2016_FoodBorneOutbreaks_508.pdf) This dataset contains data regarding the outbreaks, illnesses, and hospitalizations for foodborne illnesses that were caused by a variety of different sources. This will be useful in learning more about foodborne illnesses and may help answer some of our questions. In order to answer our questions we plan on utilizing datasets like the one mentioned previously and scholarly articles. To help analyze these datasets we will be using RStudio in order to import and view our data. We can then see if we have found a quality dataset that will be useful to our research. If it is not useful or relevant to our research we will not use the dataset. RStudio will allow us to filter this data to help find relevant information and plot it on bar graphs, scatter plots, and more. Because of the widespread nature of foodborne illnesses, there is a lot of data and information regarding them that RStudio will help us analyze.

Foodborne illnesses are a very prevalent type of illness in today's society. They are important because of how widespread they are, how many different pathogens there are, how many illnesses and deaths they cause, and much more. Our group will attempt to answer the question of is there a correlation between production of food and illnesses? We will also try to answer a variety of other questions relating to foodborne illnesses and pathogens. We will attempt to answer our questions using online datasets, which we will analyze and look at in depth using RStudio, and scholarly articles on the subject. Additionally, because of the prevalence of foodborne illness in politics, our group will look into possible policy ideas that could help prevent foodborne illness cases. By using online data and RStudio we will look in depth at the ever-important notion of a foodborne illness to try and answer several research questions.

## References
Dewey-Mattia, Daniel, et al. "Surveillance for Foodborne Disease Outbreaks—United States, 2009–2015." MMWR Surveillance Summaries 67.10 (2018): 1.

Hati, Subrota, Kunal Gawai, and V. Sreeja. "Food Borne Pathogens: A Threat to Dairy Industry." Research & Reviews: Journal of Dairy Science and Technology 4.1 (2018): 28-36.

Marder, Ellyn P., et al. "Preliminary Incidence and Trends of Infections with Pathogens Transmitted Commonly Through Food—Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network, 10 US Sites, 2006–2017." Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 67.11 (2018): 324.

Marsh, Zachary, et al. "Epidemiology of Foodborne Norovirus Outbreaks–United States, 2009–2015." Food Safety (2018): 2017028.

Scallan, Elaine, et al. "Foodborne illness acquired in the United States—major pathogens." Emerging infectious diseases 17.1 (2011): 7.

Dataset mentioned can be found at: https://www.cdc.gov/fdoss/pdf/2016_FoodBorneOutbreaks_508.pdf
